---
layout: post
title: The 80/20 of Finding a Job
permalink: /80-20-job-hunting
---
I've read a lot of stuff about job hunting and career planning, and tried even more. Most of it was crap, a very small percentage was gold, and the rest was just mediocre. The careers space seems especially prone to the ['bikeshedding'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_triviality) effect, where people love to spend gobsmacking amounts of time on things that, quite frankly, don't matter whatsoever ('make sure you print your resume on nice paper!') Another thing I've noticed in the careers space is that you have a lot of experts who seem to have The One True Way(tm) to get a job.

In my industry (Software Engineering) we don't get a lot of these experts because, well, hiring for people who can hack together some code is going gangbusters right now. A lot of people have to fend off recruiters and job offers, which is why I found [this article](https://www.twilio.com/blog/2016/02/patrick-mckenzie-on-salary-negotiation-job-hunting.html) so intriguing. But alas, it suffered from The One True Way(tm) syndrome, just like so much other job hunting advice.

Inspired by that, I wanted to write out the basic job hunting strategy that I found most effective for me. This isn't the end all of job hunting advice, it is the starting point I wish I had when looking for a job. **NOTE**: This is a work in progress. Sections may be incomplete as I periodically come back and polish things up.

### First Principles

1. There is no such thing as The One True Way(tm) of job hunting. A successful job search must incorporate multiple techniques.
2. The most important decision isn't which techniques you use, but how much time you spend doing each one. If you're spending 6 hours a day blasting out resumes and getting ZERO responses, stop. What other techniques are likely to be more effective? Focus on those first, and only come back to resume shotgunning after you've done those others.
3. You don't control the results of your efforts. That one is so important it bears repeating another way: getting hung up on interviews you didn't get or offers you didn't receive is the single easiest way to sink the proverbial ship. The decision on whether to interview or hire you is so far out of your control I don't even know where to begin. Which leads me to the next...
4. The only goals you should be focused on are your activity goals. How many people in the companies you researched have you contacted? How many of those did you take out for coffee this month? How many applications did you complete today? These are things that ultimately lead to a job, and they are in your control.
5. Job hunting follows a sales job that follows a cycle. There is a lot that can be learned from the selling profession about getting a job, and one of the most important of those is to recognize the selling cycle and prepare for it. 

### The Job Search Cycle
I believe that any job search (yes, ANY) follows the simple steps I'm about to explain. Some people may shortcut through these, but you should at least recognize them.

1. Prepare yourself psychologically for the search. This simply means committing to making a change away from your current job and preparing yourself for the inevitable roller coaster that awaits you. The most important thing here is to internalize principle #3 above, which is much easier said than done.
2. Identify your target market.
3. Prepare your marketing materials.


