---
layout: post
title: On Naming, or a Shorthand Inquiry into the Nature of a Thing
permalink: /naming
---

I'm going to be a father. While that is an awe-inspiring, terrifying, and wholly surreal thought, it is a thing related to new parenthood that currently has my consternation. What is this terrifying power I've been given to attribute a name to a living thing? A thing I do not know or understand? Furthermore, what is in a name, that identifier that has enormous power to shape our perceptions and feelings towards a thing, and indeed the thing itself?

I must admit that I'm hopelessly lost when approaching this. It seems that most don't share my difficulties, often choosing names based on whims or melodious feelings. I admit that this approach seems entirely ugly to me, a wholesale shirking of the responsibility of naming, a terrible disservice to the living being that will be forever impacted by the choice you make. Or even worse, choosing a name based on trend and fashion. Perhaps this gut feeling process of naming belies a certain instinctual parental intelligence that I don't have, but I don't think so. It is my belief, and assumption, that naming is an altogether important affair, and one that should be taken seriously. Indeed, one could argue that naming is the most important pre-partum decision that two parents can make, and I intend to give this decision its due course.

So what is a name? It is an identifier, the short hand of a thing, layered with impossible layers of parental aspiration, genetic dispositions, future-telling, and countless other things. But at its heart, a name is a reflection of the understanding of the true nature of a thing and its place in the world. Can you see my difficulty now? Effective naming requires no less than a true understanding of the thing being named, as well as an understanding of how it fits into the world.

At the first, we must understand that true understanding is impossible. Is it really possible to understand love, or why we were put here? The entirety of human knowledge has picked at the margins of these biggest questions, with no definite answers. But rather than be dismayed by this impasse, this is a helpful starting point in the seemingly impossible task of naming. If true understanding is impossible, that means life will always have an air of mystery, and indeed this mystery is what drives some of the greatest joys in life. Mystery compels the imagination and fuels the pleasure of a journey, as well as the ecstasy of discovery. True understanding would destroy this mystery, and all the quintessential human pleasures that come with it. I say that mystery is a good thing, and recognizing that it is an inexorable part of life is giving ourselves up to the fact that there will always be forces greater than ourselves, and that this is ok.

Now that we're ok with mystery, what about the things that we can understand? We know gender, size, some semblance of personality in the womb, some likely traits based on our own genes.

And what about the things we don't know yet? 

How long do we wait before we choose the name? There are some things we know, and some things that will be known after a time. The difficulty is the separating those things which aren't changed, and which things are malleable and shaped by her identity (of which name is the most significant). We want to wait enough time to understand the things that are a part of her and won't be changed, but before we are able to shape those things in her that can be shaped by the name and identity. 

Second, when this new being is brought into the world, what is her place in it? 

We aren't that different. From each other, from other animals, and at a base level, from anything - we're all just a bunch of atoms swirling around each other. But humans, like anything else, are built for a specific purpose that makes us different from other species. And within each person we have differences that belie our individual purpose - some hardcoded (like our genes), and some softcoded. Understanding this difference is the key to understanding our individual place in this world.

The name should reflect that balance. That softcoded part is the choice we all have in how we view the world, and it is definitely a choice. This is the part of ourselves we create, our own imaginary worlds, and we can choose to create them as magnificent or cynical as we wish. These have a tenuous connection to the hardcoded, or base nature of things, but in the end they are completely imaginary. This is water. I, as the parent, am not immune to this either. I have certain aspirations and hopes for you, and your name is something we will always share, for I gave it to you and you carry it your entire life. Your name is partly how I express my own softcoded identity, imprinted on to you. But you need a part of your identity to yourself, to shape how you will, and your name should give that to you. 

The hardcoded part is just as important. These are the universal truths that simply are, and are neither good nor bad. We must look at them as such. Death is an example. Your history is another example - it is not something under your control, but which has shaped your life in immense ways. Race and cultural heritage is another. Many times we confuse this part of life with the softcoded part, especially when we construct an ego and believe that to be our hardcoded selves.

So how do we go about naming? The details themselves over your naming process are important, because they imbue the name you choose with additional layers of significance.

I'm choosing to go about naming mostly within the tradition my family used to name me. That is, we adopted the Western (American) convention of a first, middle, and last name, with the last being a family name. This decision has already bound my daughter's identity to those hardcoded things we already talked about - who your family is, where you come from, and a nod towards the reality that we don't exist in a vacuum. I could've chosen to completely ignore all the naming conventions I grew up with or the traditions that have shaped my life, but I don't want to do that. What I want to leave behind are the arbitrary limitations that construct mental walls around our minds, feed the ego, and destroy the beauty inherent in the world. So pretty much any notion of gender-specific names and roles, societal/intellectual norms, or cultural limitations. We can't change the family we're born to, the society we grow up in, or whether we are born with male or female anatomy. But how we choose to incorporate those things into our own view of the world is completely up to us. This is an important thing that most people take for granted - they think the identity associated with these things are hardcoded. But that isn't true. You are not your gender, or your race, or your culture. Those things are a part of you, but how you view the world is all yours.

So I already know my daughter will have three names, and the last she will share with me, my wife, and my family. That leaves us with the first and middle names.

I've always thought a middle name the most intimate of names, at least in American culture. It is the name used most sparingly throughout life, and one who knows (and remembers!) your middle name is most likely someone important. It is here where I wish to leave a part of myself and my wife, our own softcoded layers that represent how we see our daughter fit into the world. It is an intimate connection between only us, one where my daughter is constantly reminded of her choice to see the beauty in life, with our voices constantly screaming that life is beautiful. I imagine her speaking her middle name under her breath, softly, chin hovering above chest, with a secret half smile and a surging heart. I imagine her whispering it to her friend, scared at her own vulnerability but bursting with love at the capacity to endure such an intimate moment. But mostly I imagine myself speaking to her long after I'm gone.

As to the first and most important name, I leave that for you, my daughter. The way I see it, I have three jobs: to love you unconditionally, to teach you to thrive in this world, and help you to discover yourself and your place in this world. For while I can do everything in my power to protect you, only you can decide how to give your life meaning. And in the end, that is really what life is about. A journey towards purpose, only to realize that those moments spent in the journey are moments spent in life. If your last name is the hardcoded part of you, and your middle name is your mother and I leaving a part of ourselves with you, then your first name is your choice of how you've chosen to see the world. 

Then the challenge is for us, as parents, to choose your first name in such a way that it doesn't unduly influence your choice. It shouldn't have a dominant theme or meaning, but it also shouldn't be bland. It should be a name that encourages you to reject the intellectual shackles of gender role, history and tradition, and instead see life as you choose, with the beginner's mind. 

