---
layout: post
title: Rejected
permalink: /rejected
excerpt: Today I got rejected from a job. It was a job I really wanted and I thought I'd be really good at. Don't let anyone tell you otherwise: getting rejected sucks, and it will always suck, no matter who you are. But that isn't really news to anyone. Rejection is one of those uncomfortable things that most people try to unconsciously avoid, but really shouldn't.
---

Today I got rejected. This isn't anything remarkable, but what struck me is the powerful emotion getting rejected always seems to bring up. For most of us, this is a pretty common occurrence in life and yet, it still feels horrible every time it happens. It doesn't really matter what it is - getting turned down for a date, being told you didn't get a job, a proposal that wasn't accepted, or even something as small as a friend not being able to catch a movie at the last minute. Each rejection feels like a referendum on our ego, an existential questioning that rudely yanks us out of our own bubble and makes us question who we are and what we're doing in life. Anyone who tells you rejection doesn't bother them is either superhuman or lying.

In my case, getting rejected felt like being hollowed out inside, and the void replaced with a violent tornado of shame, disappointment, and self loathing that rages on any second my focus isn't specifically directed at something. That tornado pushes out everything else and makes me a fundamentally selfish bastard only able to concentrate on myself at any given moment.

And yet, this response is completely stupid. This rejection has no practical effect on my life whatsoever. I didn't *need* the job, and I didn't lose anything by not getting it. What I lost was a fantasy that I made in my mind, one where I imagined that life would be so much rosier if only this thing would happen. Based on this fantasy, I decided that my current lot wasn't good enough, and the only way I could be satisfied would be to get this thing external to myself, over which I really have no control.

Do you see how stupid this is? We all create these fantasies in our minds that have no real basis in reality, but then we get upset when those fantasies don't match reality. And not only that, we defer our own well-being on to these fantasies. Because these fantasies are just that (not real), and we make our well-being on them, we remain vaguely dissatisifed and uncomfortable all the time, without really knowing why.

Feelings of rejection, anxiety, and unease are just a part of life. There will never come a day where you, I, or anyone else never feel these things. Our culture likes to fetishize success and make superheroes out of the people who achieve vaguely defined success (money, fame, power), but the reality is that no one is above these same feelings. Our natural tendency is to run away from them or hide from them, to do safe things so we don't have to feel them. But you know what the difference is between you and 'successful' people? They don't avoid uncomfortable feelings, they do things despite them.

If I could give myself some practical advice on dealing with rejection, it would be this: don't run from it. Embrace it and welcome it as an old friend just as it is, including all those shitty feelings that come with it. Rejection is a part of your life, and if it feels bad that just means you cared enough in the first place to feel bad about it at all. We aren't, and shouldn't be, robots sucking at the teat of pleasure and comfort. Everything we do that is worthwhile carries uncomfortable feelings with it, and those that avoid discomfort are denying themselves of life's most rewarding things. And for what? To preserve a fantasy?

The common advice is: don't let fear of rejection stop you from doing something. The logic goes: if you achieve the thing you're afraid of, that will ultimately be more rewarding than the pain of potential rejection. But that misses the point completely. Fear is an emotion hardwired into us, and it is going to come no matter what you tell yourself. It isn't something to be ashamed of or avoided, and it isn't something you should try to fight by convincing yourself that the deferred pleasure of doing the thing you're afraid of will be greater than the pain of getting rejected. Recognize it and experience it for what it is: a feeling. Where does this feeling live? What does the physical sensation of it feel like? Where does it come from? Is it a place of love, for yourself and others? Or is it because you are trying to protect a fantasy of how you think your life should be? Live in it and own it, don't try to ignore it or act like you can become someone who doesn't feel fear. Revel in your discomfort, for it truly means you are alive and doing something worthwhile.


