---
layout: post
title: The Curious Paradox of the Vacation
permalink: /vacation-paradox
excerpt: Have you ever felt worse coming back from a vacation than before you left? I have, and it sucks. After a recent vacation left me feeling this way I had to think about why that is. For me, vacation is a powerful procrastination tool, not only for avoiding work, but avoiding whatever it is in my life that I'd rather not face. The longer and more forcefully I avoid uncomfortable things, the harder they are to face. Turns out that vacationing is a very forceful way to avoid everything that makes me uncomfortable.
---
Last week was a good time of rest during our regular yearly beach vacation, but now that I'm back, I have this ball of depression/dissatisfaction/anxiety. The past few nights I've woken up in the night with raging anxiety, and I can't stop my mind worrying over everything, even small things that I know are no big deal, but get inflated to the point where I can't stop thinking about them. 

I enjoy relaxing vacations, but it seems that coming back from them gets harder every time. When I'm away I daydream about lives I haven't lived, and when I get back to my actual life there is a crushing hopelessness when I can't focus on the daydream any more. On an intellectual level I know I already have everything I need for a fulfilling life, and I hate the fact that these daydreams make me feel this way, but I don't know how to stop it. It's as if I've entered some fantasy world for awhile where responsibilities, real life, and obligations don't exist, and when I get back to those the weight of it all just feels overwhelming. Even though I know this fantasy world isn't real, and life will always be messy, and I've found beauty in the messiness.

I think another part of this ball of shitty feelings is simply that I'm forced to face and think about things I don't want to face or think about. Like our house being struck by lightning. Or how I'm not exercising. Or the anxiety about being on deadlines at work. Or worrying that our AC is going to break. Or finding a day care for our kid. Or any myriad of things about life with a new baby. Or whether or not we are financially healthy. Or whether or not my life has meaning. The list goes on, and it never really gets smaller. This freaks me out, and it gets especially worse after a vacation because it felt so nice to not worry about any of this for awhile. When you're thinking about these things on a daily basis you live with them, feel them, and accept that they are just feelings and really not that bad. But it is easy to forget that, especially if you go for awhile without having to think about them.

These feelings are strange to me because I wouldn't want the kind of life where I'm doing what I do on vacation all the time. I don't want a life where I simply sit in the sun reading fiction and drinking beer all day. In fact, after a few weeks I would get sick of it and probably start feeling this way again. 

I can identify where some of these feelings come from, but certainly not all. Uncertainty is always there. When you're on vacation, you can have (and expect) certainty about how your day is going to go. In real life certainty is both illusory and anathema, but in vacation fantasy land it is the opposite of both. It is a feeling that can only exist in a narrowly defined slice of life, yet we are inevitably left wanting when that feeling must go.

You don't have much fear on vacation because you purposefully avoid things that are fear-inducing. How scary is it to do nothing but sit on the beach for a few days? How could you possibly fail at relaxing? What is there for you to run from? Nothing. In fact, I purposefully structure my vacation so that I don't have to deal with anything scary, and I expect that I won't face anything scary. I'm literally creating a fantasy land where I don't have to deal with anything that makes me afraid.

All this vacationing is very much a dual edged sword. When done right, it removes you from your current routine and the bubble you've created around yourself, allowing you a different perspective. It also allows you to rest - physically, mentally, psychologically, intellectually. When done wrong, it is a potent avoidance mechanism. You believe that vacation is getting away from your life, or the 'bad' things in life like responsibilities and scary questions. Instead of getting out of your bubble, you create another one where you forcefully shut out anything uncomfortable, and daydream about another life where all those uncomfortable things are magically gone. All of a sudden, those uncomfortable things grow in proportion to the time (and effort) you spend not thinking about them, so that when your vacation is over and you have to confront them, the weight of them feels unbearable compared to the lightness of avoiding them.

So how do you avoid feeling worse after your vacation than before?

*Don't leave things unfinished.* Before this last vacation, our house got struck by lightning. Thankfully the only damage was a blown phone box (which we don't use), a handful of surged electronic devices, and a scary evening. But there were a lot of things related to this that I'd left unfinished, things like following up on getting our home internet restored. We've also had an ongoing AC issue that I'm worried will leave my pregnant wife sweltering in the brutal summer heat. I would think about these things on vacation, but then I'd always push them away again, despite having them as a source of constant anxiety. By the time I got home that anxiety had festered. This could've been avoided had I just taken care of these little things from the beginning.
