---
layout: post
title: Observations from the Street, NYC
permalink: /observations-nyc
---

What is it about a city like New York, that something which other cities don't have? Nominally cities seem to be the same - they are all people dense, they all feature certain things that small towns don't have like museums, restaurants of infinite variety, or a diversity of people. But yet, great cities are entirely different altogether.

I propose that great cities possess a certain unmistakeable perfection in their imperfection. To be in a great city is to fully experience the beauty in its imperfection. This is in direct opposition to the Disney-style concept of experience as expectation. We so often measure our experience in relation to our expectations: we expect novelty, and security (which are often direct opposites), and pleasure, and a certain fantasy that unpleasantness will shatter this illusion of perfection as surely as a rock shatters a window. But great cities not only challenge these fantastical expectations, they throw that shit in our face and stomp on it. Bums sleep in the shadow of the theatres of Hamlet. The smell of urine mingles with the ordinary beauty of the humble shwarma on a street cart. Graffiti lies in juxaposition with timeless architecture. When we open ourselves up to the possibilities of these juxapositions we can see the unmistakeable beauty. But stuck in our expectations all we see is the bum, or the smell of urine, or the urban blight of graffiti.

I see a city of isolation beside the seemingly infinite number of people. Buildings soar and the population density seems staggering, but New York isn't crowded. It is not only possible, but probable, to see empty streets on a Sunday morning. To see a stunning sunset against a field of green in Central Park. To be utterly anonymous yet share an intimate moment with a stranger sitting at a ramen bar. For people to be both hurriedly walking and leisurely strolling simultaneously.

The sidewalk is the ultimate democracy. I see a man, well groomed, casually dressed (but not too casually), step out from an unreachable glass box, one side of which is held open by a monochromatic doorman (you guess the color), look around cautiously, and make his way to the sidewalk after a moment's hesitation. I see the brief apprehension in his face, the realization that no one can save him, and see him take the step anyway and don a mask of casual disconcern. I also see the bum draped in paper, content to be ignored, and all the passerby content to ignore. Everything seems orderly, the stars are aligned as they should.

The park is a test of expectation. I see an elderly Chinese playing the ehru, a baleful song that can wrench the soul, and I think: what has brought her to this song? What has brought her to this station, trading her hours for a fistful of dimes on a Monday at the mercy of strangers? I see her case filled with green bills, but she doesn't seem desperate, only engrossed. Well-groomed, dress not ragged in the slightest, she pauses to nod at passerby who drop a bill or a few coins into her case. Equally likely, I think, that she would be here anyway, were she homeless or an investment banker, perfectly middle-class or desperate for every coin. I conclude that my own intuition is probably less than fucking worthless.

I am self conscious. I see my reflection against the bright glitter of the latest Gucci, my gray shirt accentuating a round middle and an upper body that sags and juts. I pull down the shirt and smooth the pants, then I look at the others on the sidewalk. No one gives a shit. I give my name to the hostess, a party of 1, thank you. She has the kindness to call me by name only when my seat is ready, instead of shouting PARTY OF ONE!!!! like every other. Another PARTY OF ONE!!!! sits beside me at the bar. I don't meet her eye or acknowledge her, as if that would be an admission that I'm uncomfortable with this, uncomfortable by another girl's hair beside me constantly brushing my arm as she bobbles her head in an exaggerated way at the things the guy next to her is saying. We both eat and leave without any indication the other were there.
