---
layout: post
title: The 80/20 of Car Buying
permalink: /8020-car-buying
excerpt: Most people were never taught how to buy a car, and they would rather poke themselves in the eye with a pointy object than walk into a dealership. But it doesn't have to be that way. Here's how to buy a car at the best price, with minimal time and stress.
---

# Introduction
## Dealers are not the enemy
## Timeline: from start to finish, no more than 2 weeks

# Phase 1: Preparation
## Financing/Price
- Goal: get a ballpark for how much you want to pay and how much you want to put down, and get pre-approved (credit unions are best).
- Should be done independent of the actual car you want, if possible, in order to take emotion out of the equation.

## Research
- Goal: choose a maximum of THREE cars to test drive. Only 3. More choices is not better, and can actually hurt you.
- In addition to price, choose your top three factors. How it drives? Towing capacity? Space? etc... 
- Maximum time: 1 week. Taking longer will only wear you down
- Decide the exact specs of the cars you want, including model, trim level, accessories, color, etc...
- Aside: is color really that important to you? Is it really? Limiting yourself to color will severely limit your options and negotiating leverage. Instead, decide what colors you absolutely cannot live with, and accept the others.

## Setup
- Goal: put systems in place to help you track everything. Separate Gmail address, Google Voice number, spreadsheet/Hubspot Sales, Hubspot Sales Chrome/Gmail extension.

# Phase 2: Test Drive
- Goal: get excited! Drive your 3 cars back-to-back and see which one excites you. If you are ok with all 3, even better! But it is helpful to have a ranking once you are done.
- Research inventories of dealers in your area to see which ones have your test drive cars in stock. If there are multiple dealers with your car, choose the ones that are closest to each other.
- Make your list of questions for each model ahead of time. 
- Take a day to do nothing but test drive. You don't have to make appointments, but it might help you if you know you have a commitment you don't want to break.
- Cardinal rule: do not, under any circumstances, buy a car after a test drive. It doesn't matter what the salesperson tells you - limited stock, time sensitive deal/price, whatever. Car buying is an emotional process, and this is one moment that is highly emotional. Dealers know this, which is why they often pressure you during the test drive.
- During the test drive: 

1. Walk in the dealer, and explain to the salesperson that you're there to test drive xyz model. They will ask for your driver's license, which is perfectly normal. 
2. Do your test drive and ask your questions. Once it is over, explain to the salesperson that you're test driving multiple models right now, and that you will start the buying process next week. Ask them to follow-up with you on Wednesday (assuming you are test driving on the weekend), thank them for their time, and leave.
3. Don't let them waste your time. If you are someone who tends to be passive, tell them you have another test drive appointment in a few minutes and you have to leave. 
4. Record your thoughts, impressions, and answers to your questions immediately after the test drive.
5. Take 2 days to choose your favorite. You don't want to take emotion out of the equation, but you want to let the raw emotion of the test drive settle and consider each option equally. After 2 days, rank your top 3. 

# Phase 3: Negotiation
- Goal: get the best price on your top car with the least amount of time, energy, and hassle.

## Leverage
Leverage is arguably the most important concept of negotiation. The goal is to have as much of it over the other party as possible. Whenever you see tips on car buying that say things like 'only shop at the end of the month! go in around closing time on Sunday! etc...', they are all referring to the same concept: leverage. Namely, that shopping at those times will increase your leverage for one reason or another.

Make no mistake: dealers are much better at this than you are. Much, MUCH better. There are only so many things you can control, and your job is to control them while taking away common leverage points from the dealer. We will do this by negotiating with as many dealers as we can simultaneously, and using email to combat decision fatigue and take emotion out of the equation.

Avoid one-size-fits-all advice like 'shop at the end of the month!' While it is true that dealers have monthly sales targets that they have to meet, getting a good deal at the end of the month also assumes a number of things you have no way of knowing: the dealer's current sales number for the month, whether or not incentives are tied to sales of specific models or all models, what the sales manager had for breakfast, etc... 

These kinds of tactics are part of a negotiating strategy, but they should be taken in context with the other information you have available. In my experience, each one by itself has a relatively weak correlation with getting the price you want.

Which brings us to the most powerful leverage you can have over a dealer: prices from other dealers.

Simply stated, your goal is to get as many offers, in writing, as you can, so that you can shop around the best price. Make no mistake: dealers are very familiar with this tactic and they know to expect it. Fortunately for you, a car is a commodity, and at this stage the almighty dollar is king. They will do everything they can to escape this fact (our customer service is best! we offer this $1500 warranty at no cost to you! etc...), but you will ignore it all. You know exactly what you want, and your goal at this point is to buy it from whoever is willing to sell it to you for the least amount of money.

## Process Overview
During this process you will do all negotiation remotely, without ever stepping foot into a dealership. 

1. Make a list of all dealers with your top car within driving distance. Use cars.com or other car buying website (or even Google Maps). Aim for around 20 prospective dealers. Increase your driving distance until you get at least 17.
2. Put each one into Hubspot as a company. All you need is the dealer's website and Hubspot automatically finds all information for you. Avoid any dealers that don't have a website.
3. Create a Deal for each company in Hubspot, setting the status as 'Prospect'.
4. Going down your list in Hubspot for each Deal:
* Visit the dealer's website and fill out their 'contact us' form with your name, email, and Google Voice number you set up above. In the comments, indicate the model you're looking for and that you are hoping to buy 'quickly'.
* Change the Deal status in Hubspot to 'Initial Contact Made'.
5. The next day, check your email. You should have a nice number of emails and/or text messages and/or voicemails. The good thing about using Gmail is that it integrates effortlessly into Google Voice so that you can do most everything in Gmail.
6. For those that sent you an email, reply to them all with the same email explaining that you're in the market for x vehicle, you have your financing, etc... Important: ask for an OUT THE DOOR price that includes all taxes, fees, accessories, etc... If you use Hubspot you can create a template for this and simply insert it straight from Gmail.
7. For those that sent you a text or voicemail: send all the same text requesting that they send you an email, and provide your email address. Our goal is to funnel all communication to email. This forces dealers to be concise and get to the point, and conserves your energy. A common sales tactic is to wear you down by holding your attention for an extended period of time and forcing you to say no (which most people hate doing). Using email exclusively allows us to easily control how much attention we give, and we can easily ignore unwanted text messages or phone calls. 
8. If the dealer refuses to use email (some will insist on talking on the phone), use your Google Voice number to text them. Cite a busy schedule that doesn't allow phone calls. And NEVER agree to come into the dealership during this phase. If they continue to call, continue to respond to voicemails with text until they give in or stop contacting you. Trust me: phone calls are a waste of time, and any dealer who is serious about selling to you will get the hint eventually and respect your wishes. Any dealer that doesn't isn't worth your time. And if a dealer won't deal with you unless you come into the dealership, drop them immediately.
NOTE: The ONLY exception to the no phone call rule is if you aren't getting enough replies to your request for offers or you aren't hearing back from dealers at all. At this stage you should have at least 7 written OTD offers. If you don't have 7 within 24 hours after first contact, pick up the phone and call. But remember: your ONLY goal is to get them to give you an OTD price in writing via email. Written offers aren't binding, but it makes it a lot harder for the dealer to feasibly squeeze more money out of you. And if they aren't willing to provide you with a detailed written offer, that is a huge red flag. Simply explain that you won't consider giving them your business without a detailed written offer first, and if they refuse, drop them immediately.

